Best Places to Paddle Board in Colorado

Home of the Rocky Mountain Range, incredible views, and plenty of water bodies, Colorado is a favorite state amongst paddle boarders everywhere. Find the very best SUP spots in this amazing state below.

1. Grand Lake: One of the top 10 most visited National Parks in the United States, and home to several of the top Colorado SUP spots on this list, is the Rocky Mountain National Park. Within this 415-square mile natural wonderland, sits Grand Lake, our number one paddle boarding destination in Colorado. 
2. Lake Dillon: The Lake Dillon area is a popular place to visit year round, known for watersports in the warm months and skiing in the winter months. Copper, Keystone, and Breckenridge mountains are some of the high peaks used for winter sports, but they also provide incredible views for paddle boarders on Lake Dillon. 
3. Bear Lake: Another top SUP location within Rocky Mountain National Park, Bear Lake sits at 9,475 feet above sea level. Bear Lake is an extremely popular area for hiking, as many of the best sights in the whole park are in the lake’s vicinity. Check out these nearby trails while you’re not paddle boarding, the views are well worth the effort! Bear Lake itself is about 10 miles long, providing plenty of space to SUP. As an alpine lake, the water typically stays rather cold. Bundle up in a wetsuit or similar attire and enjoy the quiet forest and mountainous views. 
4. Colorado River: The fifth longest river in the entire country, the mighty Colorado River stretches for 1,450 miles. This river spans seven western states including Arizona, California, Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming. As is to be expected from a river of this size, your SUP experience will vary dramatically based on where you enter the water. Some sections are relatively slow-paced, others contain rapids. Wildlife and scenery will also vary, and some parts of the river may be easier to access and navigate than others. Plan your route carefully, but don’t miss out on this incredible paddle boarding experience. 
5. Quail Lake: If you’re looking for a quiet and remote SUP experience, Quail Lake is one of the best spots to visit in Colorado. Motorized vehicles are prohibited at this lake, creating a private space for paddle boarders. Quail Lake is 22-acres and is located in Colorado Springs. While not the largest or the most isolated SUP spot, if you are vacationing near this popular Colorado city, Quail Lake can be an excellent part of your getaway. Part of Quail Lake Park, this lake is kept clean and welcoming to visitors. The water is surrounded by trails and hiking opportunities, plus gorgeous scenery.  
6. Blue Mesa Reservoir: The Blue Mesa Reservoir provides 20 miles of beautiful, blue waters for SUPs to explore. A man made lake, built from the construction of the Blue Mesa Dam, this reservoir is a particularly great place for SUP fishing. With several campgrounds in the surrounding area, Blue Mesa is an excellent spot to stay for a few days and SUP, fish, and explore to your heart’s content. Because of the reservoir’s size, the conditions on the lake can get a bit windy. Be prepared for a good workout while SUPing here!
7. Arkansas River: Flowing out of the Mississippi River, the Arkansas River is a sight to behold in and of itself. At 1,469 miles long, the Arkansas is often treacherous as it winds through Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, and Oklahoma. Some of the most beautiful stretches on the entire Arkansas River can be found in the state of Colorado, where the river climbs up the Mosquito and Sawatch mountain ranges. If you’re looking for a whitewater SUP place in the state of Colorado, the Arkansas River is one of your best options.  
8. Glenwood Springs: Glenwood Springs is one of the most diverse tourist destinations in Colorado. The Hanging Lake Trail is the best place to SUP in the area. Here, you’ll be met with incredible cliffs, beautiful waterfalls, and exciting hiking trails. The scenery in this spot is hard to match, even in Colorado. As for the rest of the Glenwood Springs area, you can find hot springs, an adventure park, incredible restaurants, and more. This location has the best mixture of natural scenery and fun, touristy activities. We highly recommend spending at least a few days in the area if you plan to paddle board and explore other attractions. 
9. Lake Granby: Offering 40 miles of shoreline and over 7,000 surface area acres to explore, Lake Granby is one of the largest bodies of water in Colorado. This is another location that stays busy in both the summer and winter months. Granby is of course a popular spot for summer paddle boarders, fishers, and all other types of boaters, but it also draws ice fishers, skaters, and even snowmobilers in the winter. Camping and hiking are also popular around the lake. If you’re looking for a spot that is all-around appealing for outdoor activities, Lake Granby is one of the best places to visit in Colorado. 
10. Standley Lake: Standley Lake is the centerpiece of the Standley Lake Regional Park and Wildlife Refuge. These protected lands stretch for 3,000 acres and feature an abundance of hiking and biking trails, campsites, wildlife viewing areas, and more. The lake itself has over 1,000 acres of surface area, providing plenty of space for paddle boarders to enjoy the nature around them in solitude. 