Dear Colorado Boater, 
You are among Colorado’s  80,369 recreational boaters 
who annually visit marinas, lakes, and rivers seeking an 
outdoor recreational experience. 
In order to ensure that your experience is a safe and 
enjoyable one, it is important for you to know and follow 
the regulations and guidelines found in this brochure. 
The Colorado Parks and Wildlife Boating Regulations are 
based upon Colorado’s Statutes mostly found in Title 33 
and Colorado Parks and Wildlife Rules and Regulations, 
but uses layman’s terms rather than legal language in most 
instances. 
Not all provisions of law pertaining to boating are 
included here. Consequently, this brochure is not suitable 
for use in law enforcement or in litigation. To find exact 
state statutes and Colorado Parks and Wildlife Rules and 
Regulations please refer to  
cpw.state.co.us/rules-and-regulations
This brochure is one of many resources available through 
Colorado Parks and Wildlife (CPW). The Colorado 
Parks and Wildlife Boating Safety Program utilizes 
the experience, training and knowledge of the state’s 
experts in recreational-related matters, including public 
access, information, safety, education, and marine law 
enforcement.
To see all the boatable waters in Colorado please visit  
cpw.info/CO-boatable-waters or to learn more about 
Colorado Parks and Wildlife and resources available to 
you please visit cpw.state.co.us 
We want you to have a safe and enjoyable boating 
experience. Please remember, if it’s your boat, it’s your 
responsibility. 
Lastly, please wear a life jacket! They save lives! 
COVER PHOTO: Lake Pueblo State Park ©Kimmell/CPW

6
Registration
Registration Required
Colorado Law (CRS 33-13-103) requires any vessel with a 
motor or sail operated in Colorado on any public water to 
be registered with Colorado Parks and Wildlife except:
	
Boats propelled manually (Canoes, Kayaks, 
Paddleboards, non motorized rafts)
	
Vessels documented by the United States Coast Guard
	
Foreign vessels
	
Vessels having valid registration and numbered 
correctly in the state of principal use and not used in 
Colorado over 60 consecutive days.  
	
Non-Resident Racing Boats (Regulation #204) on the 
day before and the day of and at the site of a Division 
authorized race. 
These guidelines include vessels that are moored, whether 
or not they are used.
How to Register 
An application to register a vessel may be submitted at 
any Colorado Parks and Wildlife Office. Please see our 
Contact Us page cpw.info/contact-us for a list of office 
locations, or call the CPW Call Center at 303.297.1192 for 
a location near you.
You can download and complete the Boat Registration 
form at cpw.state.co.us/register-boat  and return it, along 
with your proof of ownership when you visit our offices. 
What constitutes acceptable proof of ownership?
☐	 A Bill of sale that includes both the seller and buyer’s 
printed names and signatures, the vessel/vehicle 
identification number (if any), the vessel/vehicle make, 
model and year (if known), and the date of the sale;
☐	 Previous registration certificate issued by a 
governmental entity that lists the applicant as 
registered owner;
☐	 Manufacturer’s Certificate of Origin (MCO)/
Manufacturer Statement of Origin (MSO);
☐	 Certificate of Title;
☐	 Any court issued document proving ownership;
☐	 A collection of personal property by affidavit form 
pursuant to 15-12-1201, C.R.S.;  
☐	 A physical inspection form completed by a CPW agent.

8
Display of Numbers and Registration Stickers
Along with your yearly validation stickers, you will 
receive your boat registration card in the mail. The yearly 
validation stickers and registration numbers issued at the 
time of registration must be clearly visible and attached on 
each side of the bow on the forward half of the vessel (see 
images on page 9). 
Yearly validation stickers must be securely affixed 
two inches to the left of the “C” and in line with, the 
registration numbers. The numbers must be visible from 
each side of the vessel. No other numbers, letters or 
devices may be placed in the vicinity of the state-assigned 
number.
▶	 To separate the numerals from the letters, spaces 
the width of the letter “C” or hyphens may be used 
between the prefix and the number, and between the 
number and the suffix. 
▶	 Letter and numerals must be block characters at least 
three inches high and of a color that contrasts with the 
background and so maintained as to be clearly visible 
and legible. In determining height and contrast any 
border, trim, outlining or shading around the number 
shall not be considered. (CRS 33-13-104 (1))
▶	 If placement on a flared bow or if there are no such 
sides, which would make the number difficult to read, 
it should be affixed on some other part of the forward 
half of the vessel where it can be easily read. 
▶	 For Personal Watercraft (PWC), the numbers and 
stickers must also be affixed on each side of the 
forward half of the vessel on a non-removable portion 
of the hull.
▶	 On inflatable boats or vessels so configured that a 
number will not properly adhere or cannot be clearly 
seen, it should be painted on or attached to a backing 
plate, along with the registration sticker. 
▶	 Any canoe, kayak, paddleboard, sailboard or non-
motorized raft which is not required to be registered 
must be marked with the owner’s name and current 
address in a legible, clearly visible, and durable fashion. 
(CRS 33-13-103 (5))
It is the boat owners responsibility to apply 
registration numbers to their vessel. These 
registration numbers can be painted on or 
purchased at your local marine dealer or 
hardware store.

11
Weather
Before getting underway, check the latest local conditions 
such as weather, winds, flow levels, and hazards, including 
low-head dams. Detailed information can also be obtained 
by tuning to local radio stations or the National Weather 
Radio broadcasts on frequencies of 162.400, 162.425, 
162.450,  162.475, 162.500, 162.525, 162.550. 
Fueling
Most fires happen after fueling. To prevent fires, follow 
these common sense rules. 
	
Don’t smoke or strike matches. 
	
Shut off motors. Turn off electrical equipment.
	
Close all windows, doors and openings.
	
Take portable tanks out of the boat and fill them on the 
dock.
	
Keep the filling nozzle in contact with the fill pipe 
tank.
	
Wipe up any spilled gas with petroleum-absorbent 
pads. Discard the pads in a safe manner.
	
Ventilate for at least 4 minutes. Make sure there is no 
odor of gasoline anywhere in the boat. 
	
Periodically check the system for fuel leaks.
	
Visually check for leaks or fuel in the bilges.
Boat Capacity 
(CPW Regulation #213) Every single-hull vessel less than 
20 feet in length, (except sailboats, canoes, kayaks, and 
inflatable boats) and the construction of which began after 
October 31, 1972 sold in Colorado, shall have a permanent 
writing affixed to the vessel which should state:
▶	 For outboard boats:
(1) The maximum motor horsepower, the maximum 
persons capacity, and the maximum weight capacity in 
pounds.
▶	 For inboard and inboard-outdrive boats:
(1) The maximum persons capacity and the maximum 
weight capacity in pounds
▶	 For boats rated for manual propulsion:
(1) The maximum person’s capacity and the maximum 
weight capacity in pounds.
The required capacity information must be permanently 
displayed on a label or plate which is legible and clearly 
visible to the operator when underway. 

14
Navigation and Rules of the 
Road 
Federal Lateral System
United States waterways are marked for safe navigation 
by the lateral system of buoyage. The system uses a 
simple arrangement of colors, shapes, numbers and light 
characteristics to show the side on which a buoy should 
be passed when proceeding in a given direction. The 
characteristics are determined by the buoy’s position with 
respect to the navigable channels as the channels are entered 
from lakeward. 
The expression “red right returning” has long been used by 
seafarers as a reminder that the red buoys are kept to the 
starboard (right) side when proceeding from the open lake  
into port (upstream). Likewise, green buoys are kept to the 
port (left) side. 
Conversely, when proceeding toward the lake or leaving 
port, red buoys are kept to the port side and green buoys to 
the starboard side. Red buoys are always even numbered, 
and green buoys are odd numbered. Red and white 
vertically striped buoys mark the center of the channel. 
Inland Waterway Marking System
The waterway marking system in Colorado employs 
buoys and signs with distinctive standard shapes to show 
regulatory or advisory information. These markers are 
white with black letters and orange borders. They signify 
speed zones, restricted areas, danger areas and general 
information. 
Aids to navigation on state waters use red and green ATONs 
to mark channel limits, generally in pairs. Your boat should 
pass between the red buoy and its companion green buoy.
▶	 An orange diamond (on end) without a cross means: 
“Danger”. 
▶	 An orange cross within an orange diamond (on end) 
means: “Boats Keep Out”.
▶	 An orange circle means: “Controlled Area”.
▶	 An orange square or rectangle is informational.
▶	 Green ATONs (odd numbers) mark the left side, and 
red nun buoys (even numbers) mark the right side of a 
channel when proceeding upstream or returning from 
the main body of water.
▶	 Diver down flag/Alpha Flag - Stay One hundred (100’) 
from flag. 
▶	 Mooring Buoy- Only legal buoy you can tie to.

15
Navigational Aid Examples
Mooring to Buoys 
Tying up to or hanging on to any navigation buoy (except 
a mooring buoy) or beacon is prohibited. For example of 
these types of buoys, see the chart above.
Navigation Rules
The USCG Inland Navigation Rules, commonly called 
“Rules of the Road” govern the operation of boats and 
specify light and sound signals on inland waters in order 
to prevent collisions.
Boater Responsibility
Nothing in the rules of the road shall exonerate the operator 
of a vessel from the consequences of neglecting to comply 
with inland rules of the road, or from neglecting any 
precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice 
of seaman, or by the special circumstances of the case. 
Every boater should have a proper look-out which means at 
all times maintain a proper look-out by sight and hearing as 
well as by all available means appropriate in the prevailing 
circumstances and conditions so as to make a full appraisal 
of the situation and of the risk of collision.
In interpreting and complying with the inland rules of the 
road, due regard shall be had to all dangers of navigation 
and collision and to any special circumstances, including 
the limitations of the vessels involved, which may make 
departure from the rules of the road necessary to avoid 
immediate danger. 

16
Navigation Signals 
The law prescribes signals for vessels in sight of each other 
to indicate the intended course of a vessel when necessary 
for safe navigation. 
RESPONSIBILITIES BETWEEN VESSELS
If operating a power-driven vessel, you must give 
way to:
	• Any vessel not under command, such as an 
anchored or disabled vessel
	• Any vessel restricted in its ability to maneuver, 
such as a vessel towing, laying cable, or picking 
up navigation markers, or a vessel constrained 
by its draft, such as a large ship in a channel
	• A vessel engaged in commercial fishing
	• A sailing vessel unless it’s overtaking
If operating a sailing vessel, you must give way to:
	• Any vessel not under command
	• Any vessel restricted in its ability to maneuver
	• A vessel engages in commercial fishing
NAVIGATION SIGNALS
1 BLAST
Sounding one short blast (1 second) of the horn 
or whistle shows intention to direct course of 
vessel to starboard (right).
2 BLASTS
Sounding two short blasts shows intention to 
direct course of vessel to port (left).
3 BLASTS
Sounding three short blasts indicates the 
vessel’s engines are going astern (in reverse).
5 BLASTS
Sounding five or more short rapid blasts is a 
danger signal used when the other vessel’s 
intentions are not understood or its indicated 
course is dangerous.
PROLONGED  
BLAST
Sounding a prolonged blast (4 to 6 seconds) 
indicated restricted visibility.

26
Operation of a Vessel While Intoxicated (BUI)
(CRS 33-13-108.1 / 33-13-110(3)(a)) Nationally 
alcohol and drug use continues to be the leading known 
contributing factor in recreational boating deaths in the 
United States. Alcohol and drug use is the leading known 
contributing factor in fatal boating incidents; where the 
primary cause was known, it was listed as the leading 
factor in 23% of deaths.
In the State of Colorado no person shall operate any vessel, 
ride water skis,  an aquaplane, a surfboard, an inner tube, 
or similar device while under the influence of alcohol, 
controlled substances or any combination of alcohol and 
any controlled substance or any other drug that renders 
the person incapable of safely operating a vessel. 
No person of any age shall operate any vessel, ride water 
skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, an inner tube, a stand-up 
paddleboard, or similar device who has 0.08 percent or 
more by weight, or alcohol in his or her blood. A person 
who has been arrested for operating a vessel may be 
requested to submit to a breath or blood test to determine 
blood-alcohol content. Refusal of a breath or blood test 
may be admissible into evidence at trial.  
A person convicted of a misdemeanor operating a vessel 
while intoxicated could receive up to a one thousand 
dollar ($1,000) fine and one (1) year in jail. They will 
also have their boating privileges suspended for three (3) 
months for their first conviction.
A person convicted of a misdemeanor to operate, 
manipulate, or ride water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, 
an inner tube, or any similar device could receive up to a 
$1,000 dollar fine and one year in jail.
©CPW

31
Sailboats and Manually Propelled Vessels
Life jackets: Vessels less than 16 feet in length and 
all paddleboards, canoes, kayaks, sailboards or non 
motorized rafts regardless of length, need wearable Coast 
Guard-approved life jacket of a type and size appropriate 
for the conditions and the boating activity being engaged 
in must be carried for each person aboard. Life jackets 
must be readily accessible and of an appropriate size for 
the intended wearer. 
Sailboard operators may elect to wear, at their own risk, 
in lieu of carrying a U.S. Coast Guard approved personal 
flotation device, a wetsuit constructed of nylon covered 
neoprene or similar material that covers the full torso 
of the wearer. The wetsuit shall be capable of providing 
flotation to the wearer, when at rest on the surface of the 
water. (CPW Regulation #212(6))
Vessels sixteen (16) feet and over must have one U.S. Coast 
Guard-approved life jacket of a type and size appropriate 
for the conditions and the boating activity being engaged 
in for each person aboard, plus at least one Type IV 
throwable flotation device. The throwable device must be 
kept where it is immediately available. Life jackets must be 
readily accessible and fit the intended wearer properly.
Navigation Lights: All vessels are required to display 
navigation lights between sunset and sunrise and during 
times of restricted visibility. In inland and international 
waters, sailing vessels under sail alone shall exhibit 
navigation lights shown on page 43. The tricolored lantern 
and the all-round green and red lights should never be 
used together. 
A sailing vessel of less than 22' 9" (7 meters) in length 
shall, if practicable, exhibit those lights prescribed or have 
ready at hand an electric torch or lighted lantern showing 
a white light which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to 
prevent collision. A vessel under oars may display those 
lights prescribed for sailing vessels or have ready at hand 
an electric torch or lighted lantern showing a white light, 
which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent 
collision. 
Identification: All paddleboards, canoes, kayaks, sailboards 
or non-motorized rafts must be marked with the owner’s 
name and current address in a legible, clearly visible, and 
durable fashion. (33-13-103(5))
Sound Signaling Devices: (CPW Regulation #208) Every 
vessel, (except hand-propelled vessels when on whitewater) 
of Class A, 1, or 2 must have on board a sound-producing 
device for signaling. Such a device may be operated by 
mouth, hand, or power and it must be able to produce the 
navigational signals under rules of the road.

35
Life Jackets
(CPW Regulation #212) All boats, powered or non-
powered, must carry at least one wearable U.S. Coast 
Guard approved life jacket (also called a personal flotation 
device or PFD) for every person aboard. Life jackets 
bearing U.S. Coast Guard approval are identified by Types 
I, II, III, or V. Coast Guard approval is shown by a stencil 
marking or tag on the life jacket. This tag or marking 
shows the name and address of the manufacturer, the 
U.S. Coast Guard approval number and the intended use. 
It also shows the amount of flotation in the device and 
the type (I, II, III, IV or V). Failure to have a sufficient 
number of approved flotation devices aboard constitutes a 
violation of state and federal law. 
 Colorado boating law requires that all wearable Type 
I, II, III and V life jackets must be readily accessible 
and all Type IV (throwable) flotation devices must be 
immediately available. They must be kept in serviceable 
condition. If they are torn, damaged, rotted, punctured, 
or otherwise unserviceable, they no longer meet legal 
requirements and should be replaced. 
The minimum requirements are: 
▶	 All boats 16 feet or more in length, except canoes and 
kayaks: One wearable Coast Guard-approved life jacket 
(Type I, II, III or V) for each person on board and one 
throwable (Type IV) device in each boat. 
▶	 Canoes and kayaks of any length and all other boats 
less than 16 feet in length: A single wearable Coast 
Guard-approved Type I, II, III or V life jacket for each 
person on board. 
In Colorado it is a class 2 petty offense, punishable by 
a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100), to operate a 
vessel of any length unless every child under 13 years of 
age on board is wearing a proper fitting Type I, II, III or V 
Coast Guard-approved life jacket. Except when:
▶	 Below deck.
▶	 In an enclosed cabin.
Continued on page 38 

36
TYPE I: Offshore Life Jacket
•	Intended for offshore boating as well 
as open water and coastal cruising
•	Offers the most flotation and is the 
most effective life jacket in rough 
waters
•	May help prevent hypothermia
•	Designed to turn an unconscious 
wearer face up
•	Bulky
TYPE II: Near-shore Buoyant Vest
•	Intended for calm, inland water
•	May turn unconscious wearer face up
•	Good for non-swimmers
•	Provides good flotation
•	Less bulky than offshore vests
TYPE III: Children's  Life Jacket
•	Intended general recreational boating
•	Designed for mobile immersion
•	May not turn unconscious wearer face 
up
•	May have special safety features for 
children
•	May be a hybrid that is inherently 
buoyant and can inflate
Vest-type flotation 
Jacket
Manual Inflatable
TYPE III: Flotation Aids
•	Intended for fishing, hunting, 
canoeing, kayaking, water skiing 
or other high-impact, high-speed 
activities
•	Designed for possible immersion
•	May not turn unconscious wearer face 
up
•	Rugged construction
TYPE I-III LIFE JACKETS AND FLOTATION DEVICES

37
Regardless of the “Type” shown on a 
flotation device, ALL life jackets shall be 
used in accordance with the Coast Guard 
approval statement for intended use and 
manufacturer’s instructions.
TYPE IV: Throwable Flotation 
Devices
•	Intended to be thrown to 
someone who has fallen 
overboard
•	Designed to be grasped and held 
by user until he or she is rescued
•	Not a wearable life jacket
TYPE V: Special Use Device
•	Required to be worn for special 
uses or conditions
•	Made for specific activities such as 
sail boarding or rafting
•	Designed for use with deck suits, 
work vests, hybrid PFDs and others 
as marked on the label
•	Must follow Coast Guard label for 
wear and use
TYPE V: Special Use Device
Available in two types:
•	Automatic (inflates automatically 
upon 	immersion or when 
manually activated)
•	Belt Pack (only inflates when 
manually 	
	
activated; must be placed over 
head once activated)
•	Easy to wear, comfortable and cool
•	Not approved for children under 
16
•	Not intended for sports where 
immersion is expected
TYPE IV & V  LIFE JACKETS AND FLOTATION DEVICES

38
 Colorado boating law does not require wearing life 
jackets while aboard a vessel, other than as noted in 
the requirements above and those for some Type V life 
jackets and for children under age 13. Colorado Parks and 
Wildlife encourages that all boaters wear life jackets. All 
wearable life jackets must properly fit the intended wearer. 
Check the manufacturer’s label on the life jacket for the 
intended use, size restrictions and instructions on how to 
wear the life jacket. 
Inflatable Life Jackets:
The U.S. Coast Guard approved inflatable life jackets in 
1996. However, only certain brands are Coast Guard-
approved, and are only appropriate for people 16 years and 
older. Please review the owner’s manual and information 
pamphlet carefully before purchasing this type of life 
jacket. While activation upon impact is not a required 
feature, inflatables must be equipped at a minimum with 
both manual (pull) and oral (blow) inflation systems. 
Inflatable life jackets must have a full cylinder and all 
status indicators on the inflater must be green to satisfy 
requirements. Inflatables are not recommended for non-
swimmers and are not intended for use while participating 
in tow or whitewater paddle sports, or while on a personal 
watercraft (PWC). 
Personal Watercraft: Every person on board a PWC and 
anyone being towed behind a vessel must wear a US Coast 
Guard-approved life jacket. 
New CAN/US Life Jacket Label: On October 22, 2014 
the United States Coast Guard issued a final rule entitled 
Personal Flotation Devices Labeling and Standards, which 
removes references to type codes which we commonly 
know as Type I,II,III, IV or V. in its regulations on 
the carriage and labeling of USCG-approved personal 
flotation devices (PFDs). The purpose of this was to 
facilitate future incorporation by reference of new 
industry consensus standards for PFD labeling that more 
effectively convey safety information, and is a step toward 
harmonization regulations with PFD requirements in 
Canada and in other countries. 
50
70
100
NEAR SHORE (CALM)
OFFSHORE (WAVES)
INCREASING TIME TO RESCUE
150

39
It’s important to know the 
United States Coast Guard Life 
jackets you may already own 
may have the old “type” life 
jacket label (Type 1-Type V).The 
new label DOES NOT make 
your life jackets with the old 
label obsolete. You can continue 
to use your life jacket as long as 
they are still in good condition, 
proper fitting and appropriate 
for the activity. However, these 
new labels are beginning to 
enter the market and you should 
be aware of the upcoming 
changes. 
The new label is broken into 
two separate terms known as 
“wearable” and “throwable”. The 
new life jackets with the new 
label have performance icons 
and are measured in newtons. 
▶	 Lower level numbers offer 
more mobility, comfort, and 
style with good flotation, and 
are intended for near shore 
(calm water) activities.
▶	 Higher level numbers offer 
greater flotation, turning, 
and stability in the water, and 
are intended for offshore 
activities (greater time to 
rescue).
There are areas where you may 
be boating near shore when 
rescue is hours away, and a 
higher level is needed.
Be honest about your swimming 
ability. Poor swimmers may 
need a higher level to stay 
upright and easily tread water.
Remember all life jackets will 
have a United States Coast 
Guard approval number on 
them.  
For more information please 
visit wearitlifejacket.com.
Below you will find an 
example of what a new 
United States Coast Guard life 
jacket label will look like.

43
Two-Stroke Engines 
There is no statewide prohibition on the use of high 
emission two-stroke vessel engines.
Backfire Flame Control Devices
Backfire flame control devices are designed to prevent 
open flame from leaving the carburetion system in 
the event of a backfire. Vessels equipped with gasoline 
engines, except outboard motors, must have one of the 
following backfire flame control devices installed on the 
engine. These can be either: 
	
Coast Guard-approved backfire flame arrestor, suitably 
secured to the air intake with a flame-tight connection 
	
Backfire flame arrestor marked “SAE-1928” or “UL 
1111” and suitably secured to the air intake with a 
flame-tight connection 
	
Approved engine air and fuel induction system that 
provides adequate protection from propagation of 
backfire flame to the atmosphere, equivalent to that 
provided by an acceptable backfire flame arrestor 
	
Flame-tight metallic carburetor air intake attachment, 
located or positioned so backfire flames would be 
dispersed to the atmosphere outside the vessel 
Note: This last device listed must be acceptable to the Coast Guard and 
designed so that flames will not endanger the vessel, people on board, or 
nearby vessels and structures.
 Navigation Lights 
(CPW Regulation #207) Operating a boat at night 
without lights is not only dangerous, but is against the 
law. Navigation lights make it possible for boat operators 
to properly interpret and react to the movements of other 
boats in darkness. Note: If a boat is used exclusively in 
the daylight hours and not during periods of restricted 
visibility, navigation lights are not required. 
All vessels must show the required lights between sunset 
and sunrise and during periods of restricted visibility. 
Light requirements vary based on vessel length and 
propulsion type. In most cases, requirements for a 
particular vessel are the same under both inland and 
international rules. 
©ALEKSEI / ADOBE STOCK

44
1 
3 
5 
2 
4 
6 
NIGHT BOATING NAVIGATION LIGHTS
Power Driven Vessels 
A recreational motor-powered vessel underway is required 
to display a masthead light forward, red and green 
sidelights, and a sternlight, as indicated in image 1
A recreational powerboat under 39 feet 4 inches (12 
meters) may instead display a 360 degree all-round 
sternlight and combination red and green sidelights as 
indicated in image 2
.
Sailing Vessels and Vessels Under Oars
Light requirements for such vessels are as follows: 
▶	 A sailing vessel operating under power of sail only 
must exhibit sidelights and a sternlight as indicated in 
image 3
 
▶	 In a sailing vessel of less than twenty (20) meters in 
length the lights may be combined in one lantern 
carried at or near the top of the mast where it can best 
be seen.
▶	 A sailing vessel of less than 22' 9" (7 meters) in length 
must, if practicable, exhibit sidelights and a sternlight 
or lighted lantern showing a white light, which must be 
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision as 
indicated in image 4
 

45
▶	 A sailing vessel operating under machinery power 
only, or under power and sails, is considered a power-
driven vessel and must display the proper lights for a 
powerboat as indicated in image 5
 
▶	 A vessel under oars may display those lights prescribed 
for sailing vessels or have ready at hand an electric 
torch or lighted lantern showing a white light, which 
must be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision 
as indicated in image 6
The navigation lights described above are the most 
common, but boaters operating at night should be aware 
that there are other possible combinations of lights.
▶	 Anchor Lights: An anchor light is an all-round white 
light exhibited where it can best be seen and is visible 
for two miles. 
▶	 Every vessel less than twenty (20) meters (65’ 8”) in 
length must display one all-round white light when 
anchored.
▶	 Flashing red or blue lights are prohibited on all vessels, 
except emergency or law enforcement vessels. 
▶	 A sailing vessel underway may exhibit at or near the 
top of the mast, where they can best be seen, two all-
round lights in a vertical line, the upper being red and 
the lower green, but these lights shall not be exhibited 
in conjunction with the combined lantern.
Marine Sanitation Devices 
(CPW Regulation #214) No person shall maintain or 
operate upon the waters any vessel which is equipped with 
a marine sanitary device unless such water closet is self-
contained and incapable of discharging directly into the 
water. It is unlawful to deposit or discharge human waste 
or other refuse into the water. 

47
Environmental Boating 
Guidelines
Boater Responsibility 
Boaters play an important role in protecting the health 
of Colorado’s waterways. Boat sewage, greywater, 
cleaning products, spilled fuel and oil, trash and aquatic 
invasive species are all potential sources of pollution. The 
government alone cannot protect Colorado’s environment. 
Every boater must take responsibility for pollution 
prevention and try to minimize the environmental and 
public health impacts from boating activities. 
Boat Maintenance 
Products used to wash boat hulls and decks often 
contain toxic ingredients that are harmful to the marine 
environment. Degreasers dry the natural oils that 
fish need for their gills to take in oxygen. Underwater 
hull cleaning can leave toxic paint residues in harbor 
sediments. 
▶	 Limit in-water maintenance and perform cleaning 
where debris can be captured and disposed of properly. 
Marina tenants should check whether or not their 
marina has established guidelines for the type of boat 
maintenance work that can be done in the slip. 
▶	 Purchase greener alternatives that are water-based, 
biodegradable, phosphate-free, and/or less toxic. 
▶	 Do not sand in heavy wind. Sand with vacuum sanders 
or grinders (not steel wool), which automatically 
collect and store paint, varnish, or wood dust before it 
can get into the marine environment (or eyes or lungs). 
Some boat yards have these tools for rent. 
▶	 Avoid products with phosphates, ammonia, 
lye, sodium hypochlorite (bleach), chlorinated 
hydrocarbons (methylene chloride, perchloroethylene, 
or trichloroethylene), and petroleum distillates. 
▶	 Keep absorbents or rags within reach to wipe up spills. 
▶	 Suspend a tarp or polyethylene sheet between the boat 
and the dock to catch any spills, dust, or debris that 
would otherwise end up in the water. 
▶	 Consider alternative, non-biocide hull coatings that 
contain no tributyltin, heavy metals such as copper 
and zinc or biocides. Clean the bottom with a soft, 
non-abrasive sponge. Use hull cleaning companies who 
use green management practices using non abrasive 
scrubbing agents. 

50
Aquatic Nuisance Species
Non-native aquatic species—plants, fish and animals—
are invading our state’s waters. These pests can multiply 
dramatically under the right conditions, displacing native 
species, clogging waterways, and impacting navigation and 
recreation. Once introduced, they are nearly impossible to 
eliminate. Eurasian Watermilfoil, New Zealand mudsnail, 
and quagga and zebra mussels are some of the nuisance 
species that can be accidentally transported by recreational 
boaters when caught in propellers or intakes or attached 
to hulls. 
Colorado is a mandatory boat inspection state meaning 
that ALL trailered and/or motorized watercraft are 
required to be professionally inspected by state certified 
personnel:
▶	 Prior to launching in any water of the state after 
boating in a different state,
▶	 Upon exiting any water in the state which is positive 
for an invasive species, 
▶	 Any time an inspection is requested prior to entering 
or exiting a water body in Colorado.
Boaters should take full advantage of Colorado’s green 
seal and receipt program, which provides documentation 
of compliance and will reduce wait times to get through 
inspection station lines and get you on the water faster. All 
stations use green seals. However, waters that are positive 
for ANS use blue receipts, while waters that are negative 
use white receipts.
Every boater is required in regulation to Clean, D rain, and 
Dry his/her boat, trailer, and equipment every time they 
enter or exit any waters.  
 It is also required that boat operators remove all plants 
and pull all water drain plugs from the watercraft prior 
to leaving the lake or reservoir.  It is not legal to transport 
a watercraft over land with plants on board and plugs in 
place.
You can help prevent the introduction and spread of 
non-native species from one (1) body of water to another 
by cleaning, draining and drying your boat and by taking 
these steps: 
DON’T MOVE A MUSSEL!
CLEAN: all mud, plant and animal material from 
boats, trailers, boots, gear and equipment.
DRAIN: all water from bilges, live wells and  
ballast tanks.
DRY: all equipment completely before 
entering a new body of water.

51
▶	 Avoid chopping vegetation with your boat’s propeller. 
▶	 Inspect your boat and remove aquatic plants or animals 
before you leave any body of water. 
▶	 Inspect all exposed surfaces. Small mussels feel like 
sandpaper to the touch. 
▶	 Wash the hull of each watercraft thoroughly. 
▶	 Drain all water and dry all areas. 
▶	 Drain and dry the lower outboard unit. Clean and dry 
all live-wells. 
▶	 Empty and dry any buckets. 
▶	 Dispose of all bait in the trash. 
To help prevent further spread of aquatic weeds, it is 
important for boaters to clean all plant fragments from their 
watercraft and equipment.
For more information about Colorado Parks and Wildlife 
Aquatic Nuisance Species please visit: cpw.state.co.us/
aboutus/Pages/ISP-ANS.aspx
ANS Stamp
Motorboats and sailboats must have an ANS Stamp prior to 
launching in Colorado waters.
Boat owners are required to purchase the ANS Stamp 
and operators must retain proof of purchase (electronic 
or printed receipt) on his or her person, the motorboat or 
sailboat, when operating the vessel.
Motorboats and Sailboats from Colorado 
$25.00 - Colorado residents will purchase the ANS stamp 
at the time of registration.  If you register/renew your vessel 
online or via a registration renewal postcard, the cost of the 
ANS stamp appears as part of your total amount due. You 
do NOT need to manually add another twenty-five dollars 
($25) to your payment for the ANS stamp.
Residents with motorboats or sailboats documented 
by the U.S. Coast Guard or otherwise exempt from in-
state registration can purchase the ANS stamp online at 
cpwshop.com, or at any CPW office or sales location .
 Motorboats and Sailboats from Another State 
$50.00 - Non-residents can purchase their ANS stamp 
online at cpwshop.com, or at any CPW office or sales 
location.  
THANK
YOU!
Funding contributes to prevention and 
management of ANS in the state. Thank you 
for protecting our waters and contributing 
to conservation in Colorado!

52
Helpful Definitions
“Peace Officer” means a sheriff, undersheriff, deputy sheriff, police 
officer, Colorado State Patrol officer, or marshal, a district attorney, 
assistant district attorney, deputy district attorney, or special deputy 
district attorney, an authorized investigator of a district attorney, an 
agent of the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, a district wildlife manager 
or special district wildlife manager, or a parks and recreation officer or 
special parks and recreation officer.
“Personal Watercraft” means a motorboat that uses an inboard motor 
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power and 
is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on 
the vessel, rather than the conventional manner of sitting or standing 
inside the vessel. “Personal watercraft” includes a motorboat known 
as a “specialty prop-craft”, which is similar in appearance to a personal 
watercraft but powered by an outboard or motor driven propeller.
“Masthead light” means a white light placed over the fore and aft 
centerline of the vessel showing an unbroken light over an arc of the 
horizon of 225 degrees and so fixed as to show the light from right ahead 
to 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on either side of the vessel, except that on 
a vessel of less than 12 meters in length the masthead light shall be placed 
as nearly as practicable to the fore and aft centerline of the vessel.
“Motorboat” means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not 
such machinery is the principal source of propulsion including  “personal 
watercraft”.
“Operate” means to navigate or otherwise use a vessel.
“Owner” means a person who claims lawful possession of a vessel by 
virtue of legal title or an equitable interest which entitles him to such 
possession.
“Restricted visibility” means any condition in which visibility is 
restricted by fog, mist, falling snow, heavy rainstorms, sandstorms, or any 
other similar causes.
“Safe Speed” the following factors shall be among those taken into 
account by all vessels: 
(1)	
The state of visibility; 
(2)	
The traffic density including concentration of fishing vessels or any 
other vessels; 
(3)	
The maneuverability of the vessel with special reference to stopping 
distance and turning ability in the prevailing conditions; 
(4)	
At night the presence of background light such as from shores 
lights or from back scatter of its own lights; 
(5)	
The state of wind, sea, and current, and the proximity of 
navigational hazards; 
(6)	
The draft in relation to the available depth of water.
“Sailboard” means a sail propelled vessel with no freeboard and 
equipped with a swivel mounted mast, not secured to a hull by guys or 
stays.
“Sailboat” means any vessel propelled by the effect of wind on a sail, 
including sailboards. Any vessel propelled by both sail and machinery of 
any sort shall be deemed a motorboat, when being so propelled.

53
“Sidelights” means a green light on the starboard side and a red light on 
the port side each showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon 
of 112.5 degrees and so fixed as to show the light from right ahead to 22.5 
degrees abaft the beam on its respective side. On a vessel less than 20 
meters (65’ 8”) in length the side lights may be combined in one lantern 
carried on the fore and aft centerline of the vessel, except that on a vessel 
of less than 12 meters (39’ 5”) in length the sidelights when combined 
in one lantern shall be placed as nearly as practicable to the fore and aft 
centerline of the vessel.
“Single-Chambered Air-Inflated Device” means an air-inflated device 
that has only one air compartment, such as inner tubes and certain types 
of air mattresses and small inflatable rafts.
“Sternlight” means a white light placed as nearly as practicable at the 
stern showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 135 
degrees and so fixed as to show the light 67.5 degrees from right aft on 
each side of the vessel.
“Underway” means that a vessel is not at anchor, or made fast to the 
shore, or aground.
“Vessel” means every description of watercraft used or capable of being 
used as a means of transportation of persons and property on the water, 
including all types of stand-up paddleboards. Does not include any 
single-chambered, air-inflated devices that are not paddleboards; or 
Seaplanes. 
“Vessel not under command” means a vessel which through some 
exceptional circumstance is unable to maneuver as required by these 
regulations and is therefore unable to keep out of the way of another 
vessel.
“Vessel restricted in its ability to maneuver” means a vessel which from 
the nature of its work is restricted in its ability to maneuver as required 
by these regulations and is therefore unable to keep out of the way of 
another vessel; vessels restricted in their ability to maneuver include, but 
are not limited to: 
(1)	
A vessel engaged in laying, servicing, or picking up a navigation 
mark; 
(2)	
A vessel engaged in underwater operations; 
(3)	
A vessel engaged in a towing operation such as severely restricts 
the towing vessel and its tow in their ability to deviate from their 
course.
“Vessel staging area” means any parking lot, boat ramp, or other 
location that any vessel is transported to or from by a motor vehicle 
and where such vessel is placed into operation on or in the water. 
“Vessel staging area” does not include any location to which a vessel is 
transported primarily for the purpose of service, maintenance, repair or 
sale.
“Wake” means a movement of the water created by a boat underway, 
great enough to disturb a boat.
